 
ГҺВ№ЛҶВҝГ…Е Вё Е“ВёВ№ВЈoВёВёВҘВёвҖәВё вҖҡГ№ВЈ В№ВЁВёЛҶГ…ВёВ¬Вё В№ВЁВёЕҫВёВёЕ Вё, ЛҶВҪГ…вҖәГҚГәВЎВё ЛҶГ…ВёВЎВёВёГ„ВҘВёВЎВё, В¬ГёвҖәвҖҷВЈ 1, ЛҶГ…Г»Г… Е“ВёВЈВҪвҖқ, ЛҶГ…ГёВҘВёВёВёВё, ЕёГ©ВҝВёЖ’Г„ 400005 
_____________________________________________________________________________________
________________ 
Department of Banking Operations and Development, Central Office, Centre 1, Cuffe Parade, Colaba, 
Mumbai,400005 
вҖҷВҪВ№ВҘВёГ»Г…ГёвҖәВё /Tel No:022-22189131 Г»ВҫГ…ГҶВ¬Вё/Fax No:022-22185792 Email ID:cgmicdbodco@rbi.org.in 
 
 
 
RBI/ 2009-10/73 
DBOD. AML. BC. No. 2/14 .01.001/2009-10                                July 1, 2009 
The Chairman/CEOs of all Scheduled Commercial Banks (excluding 
RRBs) / all Financial Institutions 
Dear Sir, 
Master Circular вҖ“ Know Your Customer (KYC) norms / Anti-Money 
Laundering (AML) standards/Combating of Financing of Terrorism 
(CFT)/Obligation of banks under PMLA, 2002 
 
Please refer to our Master Circular DBOD.AML.BC.No.12/ 14.01.001 / 2008 вҖ“ 
09 dated July 01, 2008 consolidating instructions/guidelines issued to banks till 
June 30, 2008 on Know Your Customer (KYC) norms /Anti-Money Laundering 
(AML) standards/Combating of Financing of Terrorism (CFT)/Obligation of banks 
under PMLA, 2002. This Master Circular is a consolidation of the instructions on 
Know 
Your 
Customer 
(KYC) 
norms 
/Anti-Money 
Laundering 
(AML) 
standards/Combating of Financing of Terrorism (CFT)/Obligation of banks under 
PMLA, 2002 issued up to June 30, 2009.  
 
2.   The Master Circular has been placed on the RBI website: 
 
(http://www.rbi.org.in )
 
 
 
 
Yours faithfully, 
 
 
 
(Vinay Baijal) 
Chief General Manager 
 
 
 
3
 
 
Master Circular on Know Your Customer (KYC) norms/Anti-Money 
Laundering (AML) standards/Combating of Financing of Terrorism 
(CFT)/Obligation of banks under Prevention of Money Laundering Act, 
(PMLA), 2002 
Purpose 
Banks were advised to follow certain customer identification procedure for 
opening of accounts and monitoring transactions of a suspicious nature for the 
purpose of reporting it to appropriate authority. These вҖҳKnow Your CustomerвҖҷ 
guidelines have been revisited in the context of the Recommendations made by 
the Financial Action Task Force (FATF) on Anti Money Laundering (AML) 
standards and on Combating Financing of Terrorism (CFT). Detailed 
guidelines based on the Recommendations of the Financial Action Task Force 
and the paper issued on Customer Due Diligence (CDD) for banks by the Basel 
Committee on Banking Supervision, with indicative suggestions wherever 
considered necessary, have been issued. Banks have been advised to ensure 
that a proper policy framework on вҖҳKnow Your CustomerвҖҷ and Anti-Money 
Laundering measures with the approval of the Board is formulated and put in 
place. 
2. This Master Circular aims at consolidating all the instructions/guidelines issued 
by RBI on Know Your Customer (KYC) norms/Anti-Money Laundering (AML) 
standards/Combating Financing of Terrorism (CFT)/Obligations of banks under 
PMLA, 2002. The Master Circular has been placed on the RBI website 
(http://www.rbi.org.in). 
 
Previous instructions 
 
A list of circulars issued in this regard is given in Annex вҖ“ III. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
4
 
 
Application 
 
i) 
The instructions, contained in the master circular, are applicable to all 
Financial Institutions and all the scheduled commercial banks 
excluding RRBs. 
ii) 
These guidelines are issued under Section 35A of the Banking 
Regulation Act, 1949 and Rule 7 of Prevention of Money-Laundering 
(Maintenance of Records of the Nature and Value of Transactions, 
the Procedure and Manner of Maintaining and Time for 
Furnishing Information and Verification and Maintenance of Records 
of the Identity of the Clients of the Banking Companies, Financial 
Institutions and Intermediaries) Rules, 2005. Any contravention 
thereof or non-compliance shall attract penalties under Banking 
Regulation Act. 
iii) 
This Master Circular consolidates all the circulars issued on the 
subject up to June 30, 2009. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
5
 
 
Structure 
1 
Introduction 
1.1 
KYC/AML/CFT 
1.2 
Definition of Customer 
2 
Guidelines 
2.1 
General 
2.2 
KYC Policy 
2.3 
Customer Acceptance Policy 
2.4 
Customer Identification Procedure 
2.5 
Customer Identification Requirements вҖ“ Indicative guidelines 
2.6 
Small deposit accounts 
2.7 
Monitoring of transactions 
2.8 
Closure of Accounts 
2.9 
Risk Management 
2.10 Introduction of new technology вҖ“ credit/debit/smart/gift card 
2.11 Combating Financing of Terrorism 
 
2.12 Correspondent Banking 
 
2.13 Applicability  to branches  and subsidiaries  outside India 
 
2.14 Wire Transfers 
2.15 Principal Officer 
2.16 Maintenance of records of transactions/Information to be preserved/ 
maintenance and preservation of records/Cash and Suspicious 
transactions reporting to Financial Intelligence Unit-India (FIU-IND) 
2.17 Cash and Suspicious Transaction Report 
2.18 Customer Education/Training of Employees/Hiring of Employees 
3 
Annex 
3.1 
Annex - I - Indicative List of documents required for opening  of accounts 
3.2 
Annex вҖ“ II вҖ“ List of reporting formats 
3.3 
Annex вҖ“ III вҖ“ List of circulars consolidated in  the Master Circular 
 
 
 
 
6
 
 
 
1 Introduction 
1.1 Know Your Customer (KYC) Norms/Anti-Money Laundering (AML) 
Measures/Combating of Financing of Terrorism (CFT)/Obligations of banks 
under PMLA, 2002 
 
The objective of KYC/AML/CFT guidelines is to prevent banks from being used, 
intentionally or unintentionally, by criminal elements for money laundering or 
terrorist 
financing 
activities. 
KYC 
procedures 
also 
enable 
banks 
to 
know/understand their customers and their financial dealings better which in turn 
help them manage their risks prudently. 
 
1. 2   Definition of Customer 
 
 
For the purpose of KYC policy, a вҖҳCustomerвҖҷ is defined as : 
вҖў 
a person or entity that maintains an account and/or has a business 
relationship with the bank; 
вҖў 
one on whose behalf the account is maintained (i.e. the beneficial owner); 
вҖў 
beneficiaries of transactions conducted by professional intermediaries, 
such as Stock Brokers, Chartered Accountants, Solicitors etc. as 
permitted under the law, and 
вҖў 
any person or entity connected with a financial transaction which can pose 
significant reputational or other risks to the bank, say, a wire transfer or 
issue of a high value demand draft as a single transaction. 
 
 
            
 
 
 
 
7
 
2. Guidelines 
2.1 General 
i) Banks should keep in mind that the information collected from the customer 
for the purpose of opening of account is to be treated as confidential and 
details thereof are not to be divulged for cross selling or any other like 
purposes. Banks should, therefore, ensure that information sought from the 
customer is relevant to the perceived risk, is not intrusive, and is in 
conformity with the guidelines issued in this regard. Any other information 
from the customer should be sought separately with his/her consent and 
after opening the account. 
ii) Banks should ensure that any remittance of funds  by way of demand  draft, 
mail/telegraphic transfer or any other mode and issue of travellersвҖҷ cheques 
for value of Rupees fifty thousand and above is effected by debit to the 
customerвҖҷs account or against cheques and not against cash payment. 
iii) Banks should ensure that the provisions of Foreign Contribution 
(Regulation) Act, 1976 as amended from time to time, wherever applicable 
are strictly adhered to. 
 
2.2 KYC Policy 
Banks should frame their KYC policies incorporating the following four key 
elements: 
a) Customer Acceptance Policy; 
b) Customer Identification Procedures; 
c) 
Monitoring of Transactions; and 
d) Risk Management. 
 
 
 
 
8
 
 
2.3 Customer Acceptance Policy (CAP) 
 
a) Every bank should develop a clear Customer Acceptance Policy laying 
down explicit criteria for acceptance of customers. The Customer Acceptance 
Policy must ensure that explicit guidelines are in place on the following aspects 
of customer relationship in the bank. 
 
(i) 
No account  is opened in anonymous or fictitious/benami name(s); 
 
(ii) 
Parameters of risk perception are clearly defined in terms of the 
nature of business activity , location of customer  and his clients, 
mode of payments, volume of turnover, social and financial status etc. 
to enable categorisation of customers into low, medium and high risk 
(banks may choose any suitable nomenclature viz. level I, level II and 
level III). Customers requiring very high level of monitoring, e.g. 
Politically Exposed Persons (PEPs) may, if considered necessary, 
be categorised even higher; 
(iii) 
Documentation requirements and other information to be collected in 
respect of different categories of customers depending on 
perceived risk and keeping in mind the requirements of PML Act, 
2002 and instructions/guidelines issued by Reserve Bank from time 
to time; 
iv)      Not to open an account or close an existing account where the bank 
is unable to apply appropriate customer due diligence measures 
i.e. bank is unable to verify the identity and /or obtain documents 
required as per the risk categorisation due to non cooperation of 
the customer or non reliability of the data/information furnished to 
the bank. It is, however, necessary to have suitable built in 
safeguards to avoid harassment of the customer. For example, 
decision by a bank to close an account should be taken at a 
reasonably high level after giving due notice to the customer 
explaining the reasons for such a decision; 
 
 
9
 
 
v)      Circumstances, in which a customer is permitted to act on behalf 
of another person/entity, should be clearly spelt out in conformity 
with the established law and practice of banking as there could 
be occasions when an account is operated by a mandate holder 
or where an account is opened by an intermediary in fiduciary 
capacity and 
vi)     Necessary checks before opening a new account so as to ensure 
that the identity of the customer does not match with any person 
with known criminal background or with banned entities such as 
individual terrorists or terrorist organisations etc. 
 
b) Banks should prepare a profile for each new customer based on risk 
categorisation. The customer profile may contain information relating to 
customerвҖҷs identity, social/financial status, nature of business activity, 
information about his clientsвҖҷ business and their location etc. The nature and 
extent of due diligence will depend on the risk perceived by the bank. However, 
while preparing customer profile banks should take care to seek only such 
information from the customer, which is relevant to the risk category and is not 
intrusive. The customer profile is a confidential document and details 
contained therein should not be divulged for cross selling or any other 
purposes. 
 
c) For the purpose of risk categorisation, individuals (other than High Net Worth) 
and entities whose identities and sources of wealth can be easily identified and 
transactions in whose accounts by and large conform to the known profile, 
may be categorised as low risk. Illustrative examples of low risk customers 
could be salaried employees whose salary structures are well defined, people 
belonging to lower economic strata of the society whose accounts show small 
balances and low turnover, Government Departments and Government owned 
companies, regulators and statutory bodies etc. In such cases, the policy may 
require that only the basic requirements of verifying the identity and location of 
 
 
10
 
 
the customer are to be met. Customers that are likely to pose a higher than 
average risk to the bank should be categorised as medium or high risk 
depending on customer's background, nature and location of activity, country 
of origin, sources of funds and his client profile etc. Banks should apply 
enhanced due diligence measures based on the risk assessment, thereby 
requiring intensive вҖҳdue diligenceвҖҷ for higher risk customers, especially those for 
whom the sources of funds are not clear. Examples of customers requiring 
higher due diligence include (a) nonresident customers; (b) high net worth 
individuals; (c) trusts, charities, NGOs and organizations receiving 
donations; (d) companies having close family shareholding  or  beneficial  
ownership; (e)  firms with  ' sleeping partners '; (f) politically exposed 
persons (PEPs) of foreign origin; (g) non-face to face customers and (h) those 
with dubious reputation as per public information available etc. However, only 
NPOs/NGOs promoted by United Nations or its agencies may be classified as 
low risk customer. 
 
d) It is important to bear in mind that the adoption of customer acceptance policy 
and its implementation should not become too restrictive and must not result in 
denial of banking services to general public, especially to those, who are 
financially or socially disadvantaged. 
 
 
2.4 
Customer Identification Procedure ( CIP) 
a) The policy approved by the Board of banks should clearly spell out the 
Customer Identification Procedure to be carried out at different stages i.e. while 
establishing a banking relationship; carrying out a financial transaction or when 
the bank has a doubt about the authenticity/veracity or the adequacy of the 
previously obtained customer identification data. Customer identification means 
identifying the customer and verifying his/her identity by using reliable, 
independent source documents, data or information. Banks need to obtain 
sufficient information necessary to establish, to their satisfaction, the identity of 
each new customer, whether regular or occasional, and the purpose of the 
 
 
11
 
 
intended nature of banking relationship. Being satisfied means that the bank must 
be able to satisfy the competent authorities that due diligence was observed 
based on the risk profile of the customer in compliance with the extant 
guidelines in place. Such risk based approach is considered necessary to 
avoid disproportionate cost to banks and a burdensome regime for the 
customers. Besides risk perception, the nature of information/documents 
required would also depend on the type of customer (individual, corporate etc.). 
For customers that are natural persons, the banks should obtain sufficient 
identification data to verify the identity of the customer, his address/location, 
and also his recent photograph. For customers that are legal persons or entities, 
the bank should (i) verify the legal status of the legal person/entity through 
proper and relevant documents; (ii) verify that any person purporting to act on 
behalf of the legal person/entity is so authorised and identify and verify the 
identity of that person; (iii) understand the ownership and control structure of 
the customer and determine who are the natural persons who ultimately control 
the legal person. Customer identification requirements in respect of a few 
typical cases, especially, legal persons requiring an extra element of caution 
are given in paragraph 2.5 below for guidance of banks. Banks may, however, 
frame their own internal guidelines based on their experience of dealing with 
such persons/entities, normal bankersвҖҷ prudence and the legal requirements as 
per established practices. If the bank decides to accept such accounts in terms 
of the Customer Acceptance Policy, the bank  should take reasonable measures 
to identify the beneficial owner(s) and verify his/her/their identity in a manner so 
that it is satisfied that it knows who the beneficial owner(s) is/are. 
 
b)   It  has been observed  that some close relatives, e.g. wife, son, daughter and  
daughter and parents etc. who live with their husband, father/mother and son, as 
the case may be, are finding it difficult to open account in some banks as the 
utility bills required for address verification are not in their name. It is clarified, 
that in such cases, banks can obtain an identity document and a utility bill of the 
relative with whom the prospective customer is living along with a declaration 
from the relative that the said person (prospective customer) wanting to open an 
 
 
12
 
 
account is a relative and is staying with him/her. Banks can use any 
supplementary evidence such as a letter received through post for further 
verification of the address. While issuing operational instructions to the branches 
on the subject, banks should keep in mind the spirit of instructions issued by 
the Reserve Bank and avoid undue hardships to individuals who are, otherwise, 
classified as low risk customers. 
 
c)   Banks should introduce a system of periodical updation of customer 
identification data (including photograph/s) after the account is opened. The 
periodicity of such updation should not be less than once in five years in case of 
low risk category customers and not less than once in two years in case of high 
and medium risk categories. 
 
d)  An indicative list of the nature and type of documents/information that may be  
may be relied upon for customer identification is given in Annex-I to this Master 
Circular. It is clarified that permanent correct address, as referred to in Annex-I, 
means the address at which a person usually resides and can be taken as the 
address as mentioned in a utility bill or any other document accepted by the bank 
for verification of the address of the customer.  
 
e)  It has  been  brought  to our notice  that the  said   indicative  list  furnished  in   
Annex -I, is being treated by some banks as an exhaustive list as a result of 
which a section of public is being denied access to banking services. Banks are, 
therefore, advised to take a review of their extant internal instructions in this 
regard. 
2.5 Customer Identification Requirements вҖ“ Indicative Guidelines 
i) 
Trust/Nominee or Fiduciary Accounts 
There exists the possibility that trust/nominee or fiduciary accounts can be used 
to circumvent the customer identification procedures. Banks should determine 
whether the customer is acting on behalf of another person as trustee/nominee 
 
 
13
 
 
or any other intermediary. If so, banks should insist on receipt of satisfactory 
evidence of the identity of the intermediaries and of the persons on whose behalf 
they are acting, as also obtain details of the nature of the trust or other 
arrangements in place. While opening an account for a trust, banks should 
take reasonable precautions to verify the identity of the trustees and the settlors 
of trust (including any person settling assets into the trust), grantors, protectors, 
beneficiaries and signatories. Beneficiaries should be identified when they are 
defined. In the case of a 'foundation', steps should be taken to verify the founder 
managers/ directors and the beneficiaries, if defined. 
 
ii) 
Accounts of companies and firms 
Banks need to be vigilant against business entities being used by individuals as a 
вҖҳfrontвҖҷ for maintaining accounts with banks. Banks should examine the control 
structure of the entity, determine the source of funds and identify the natural 
persons who have a controlling interest and who comprise the management. 
These requirements may be moderated according to the risk perception e.g. in 
the case of a public company it will not be necessary to identify all the 
shareholders. 
  
iii) 
Client accounts opened by professional intermediaries 
 
When the bank has knowledge or reason to believe that the client account 
opened by a professional intermediary is on behalf of a single client, that client 
must be identified. Banks may hold 'pooled' accounts managed by professional 
intermediaries on behalf of entities like mutual funds, pension funds or other types 
of funds. Banks also maintain 'pooled' accounts managed by lawyers/chartered 
accountants or stockbrokers for funds held 'on deposit' or 'in escrow' for a range 
of clients. Where funds held by the intermediaries are not co-mingled at the 
bank and there are 'sub-accounts', each of them attributable to a beneficial 
owner, all the beneficial owners must be identified. Where such funds are co-
mingled at the bank, the bank should still look through to the beneficial owners. 
 
 
14
 
 
Where the banks rely on the 'customer due diligence' (CDD) done by an 
intermediary, they should satisfy themselves that the intermediary is 
regulated and supervised and has adequate systems in place to comply with the 
KYC requirements. It should be understood that the ultimate responsibility for 
knowing the customer lies with the bank. 
iv)  Accounts of Politically Exposed Persons (PEPs) resident outside India 
Politically exposed persons are individuals who are or have been entrusted with 
prominent public functions in a foreign country, e.g., Heads of States or of 
Governments, senior politicians, senior government/judicial/military officers, 
senior executives of state-owned corporations, important political party officials, 
etc. Banks should gather sufficient information on any person/customer of this 
category intending to establish a relationship and check all the information 
available on the person in the public domain. Banks should verify the identity of 
the person and seek information about the sources of funds before accepting the 
PEP as a customer. The decision to open an account for a PEP should be 
taken at a senior level which should be clearly spelt out in Customer 
Acceptance Policy. Banks should also subject such accounts to enhanced 
monitoring on an ongoing basis. The above norms may also be applied to the 
accounts of the family members or close relatives of PEPs. 
 
 
v) Accounts of non-face-to-face customers 
 
With the introduction of telephone and electronic banking, increasingly accounts 
are being opened by banks for customers without the need for the customer to 
visit the bank branch. In the case of non-face-to-face customers, apart from 
applying the usual customer identification procedures, there must be specific and 
adequate procedures to mitigate the higher risk involved. Certification of all the 
documents presented should be insisted upon and, if necessary, additional 
 
 
15
 
 
documents may be called for. In such cases, banks may also require the first 
payment to be effected through the customer's account with another bank which, 
in turn, adheres to similar KYC standards. In the case of cross-border customers, 
there is the additional difficulty of matching the customer with the documentation 
and the bank may have to rely on third party certification/introduction. In such 
cases, it must be ensured that the third party is a regulated and supervised entity 
and has adequate KYC systems in place. 
2.6 Small Deposit Accounts 
 
(i) Although flexibility in the requirements of documents of identity and proof of 
address has been provided in the above mentioned KYC guidelines, it has 
been observed that a large number of persons, especially, those belonging to 
low income group both in urban and rural areas are not able to produce such 
documents to satisfy the bank about their identity and address. This would lead 
to their inability to access the banking services and result in their financial 
exclusion. Accordingly, the KYC procedure also provides for opening accounts 
for those persons who intend to keep balances not exceeding Rupees Fifty 
Thousand (Rs. 50,000/-) in all their accounts taken together and the total credit 
in all the accounts taken together is not expected to exceed Rupees One Lakh 
(Rs. 1,00,000/-) in a year. In such cases, if a person who wants to open an 
account and is not able to produce documents mentioned in Annex I of this 
master circular, banks should open an account for him, subject to: 
 
Introduction from another account holder who has been subjected to full KYC 
procedure. The introducerвҖҷs account with the bank should be at least six 
months old and should show satisfactory transactions. Photograph of the 
customer who proposes to open the account and also his address need to be 
certified by the introducer, 
 
 
 
 
 
16
 
 
 
or 
 
any other evidence as to the identity and address of the customer to the 
satisfaction of the bank. 
 
ii)    While opening accounts as described above, the customer should be made 
aware that if at any point of time, the balances in all his/her accounts with the 
bank (taken together) exceeds Rupees Fifty Thousand (Rs. 50,000/-) or total 
credit in the account exceeds Rupees One Lakh (Rs. 1,00,000/-) in a year, no 
further transactions will be permitted until the full KYC procedure is completed. 
In order not to inconvenience the customer, the bank must notify the customer 
when the balance reaches Rupees Forty Thousand (Rs. 40,000/-) or the total 
credit in a year reaches Rupees Eighty thousand (Rs. 80,000/-) that appropriate 
documents for conducting the KYC must be submitted otherwise operations in 
the account will be stopped. 
 
 
2.7     Monitoring of Transactions 
 
 
Ongoing monitoring is an essential element of effective KYC procedures. Banks 
can effectively control and reduce their risk only if they have an understanding of 
the normal and reasonable activity of the customer so that they have the 
means of identifying transactions that fall outside the regular pattern of activity. 
However, the extent of monitoring will depend on the risk sensitivity of the 
account. Banks should pay special attention to all complex, unusually large 
transactions and all unusual patterns which have no apparent economic or 
visible lawful purpose. Banks may prescribe threshold limits for a particular 
category of accounts and pay particular attention to the transactions which 
exceed these limits. Transactions that involve large amounts of cash 
inconsistent with the normal and expected activity of the customer should 
particularly attract the attention of the bank. Very high account turnover 
inconsistent with the size of the balance maintained may indicate that funds 
are being 'washed' through the account. High-risk accounts have to be subjected 
 
 
17
 
 
to intensified monitoring. Every bank should set key indicators for such 
accounts, taking note of the background of the customer, such as the country 
of origin, sources of funds, the type of transactions involved and other risk 
factors. Banks should put in place a system of periodical review of risk 
categorization of accounts and the need for applying enhanced due diligence 
measures. Such review of risk categorisation of customers should be carried 
out at a periodicity of not less than once in six months. 
 
2.8   Closure of accounts 
 
Where the bank is unable to apply appropriate KYC measures due to non-
furnishing of information and /or non-cooperation by the customer, the bank 
should consider closing the account or terminating the banking/business 
relationship after issuing due notice to the customer explaining the reasons for 
taking such a decision. Such decisions need to be taken at a reasonably senior 
level. 
 
2.9    Risk Management 
 
a)   The Board of Directors of the bank should ensure that an effective KYC 
programme is put in place by establishing appropriate procedures and ensuring 
their effective implementation. It should cover proper management oversight, 
systems and controls, segregation of duties, training and other related matters. 
Responsibility should be explicitly allocated within the bank for ensuring that the 
bankвҖҷs policies and procedures are implemented effectively. Banks should, in 
consultation with their boards, devise procedures for creating risk profiles of their 
existing and new customers and apply various anti money laundering measures 
keeping in view the risks involved in a transaction, account or banking/business 
relationship. 
 
b)  BanksвҖҷ internal audit and compliance functions have an important role in 
evaluating and ensuring adherence to the KYC policies and procedures. As a 
general rule, the compliance function should provide an independent evaluation of 
 
 
18
 
 
the bankвҖҷs own policies and procedures, including legal and regulatory 
requirements. Banks should ensure that their audit machinery is staffed adequately 
with individuals who are well-versed in such policies and procedures. Concurrent/ 
Internal Auditors should specifically check and verify the application of KYC 
procedures at the branches and comment on the lapses observed in this 
regard. The compliance in this regard should be put up before the Audit 
Committee of the Board on quarterly intervals. 
 
2.10 
Introduction of New Technologies вҖ“ Credit cards/debit cards/ 
smart cards/gift cards 
 
Banks should pay special attention to any money laundering threats that may 
arise from new or developing technologies including internet banking that might 
favour anonymity, and take measures, if needed, to prevent their use in money 
laundering schemes. Many banks are engaged in the business of issuing a 
variety of Electronic Cards that are used by customers for buying goods and 
services, drawing cash from ATMs, and can be used for electronic transfer of 
funds. Banks are required to ensure full compliance with all KYC/AML/CFT 
guidelines issued from time to time, in respect of add-on/ supplementary 
cardholders also. Further, marketing of credit  cards is generally done through the 
services of agents. Banks should ensure that appropriate KYC procedures are 
duly applied before issuing the cards to the customers. It is also desirable that 
agents are also subjected to KYC measures. 
 
2.11   Combating  Financing  of  Terrorism 
 
 
 
a)   In  terms of  PMLA  Rules,  suspicious  transaction  should  include inter alia  
transactions which give rise to a reasonable ground of suspicion that these may 
involve financing of the activities relating to terrorism. Banks are, therefore, 
advised to develop suitable mechanism through appropriate policy framework for 
enhanced monitoring of accounts suspected of having terrorist links and swift 
 
 
19
 
 
identification of the transactions and making suitable reports to the Financial 
Intelligence Unit вҖ“ India (FIU-IND) on priority. 
 
 
b)   As and when list of individuals and entities, approved by Security Council 
Committee established pursuant to various United Nations' Security Council 
Resolutions (UNSCRs), are received from Government of India, Reserve Bank 
circulates these to all banks and financial institutions. Banks/Financial Institutions 
should ensure to update the consolidated list of individuals and entities as 
circulated by Reserve Bank.  Further, the updated list of such individuals/entities  
can 
be 
accessed 
in 
the 
United 
Nations 
 
website 
at  
http://www.un.org/sc/committees/1267/consolist.shtml. Banks are advised that 
before opening any new account it should be ensured that the name/s of the 
proposed customer does not appear in the list. Further, banks should scan all 
existing accounts to ensure that no account  is held by or linked to any of the 
entities or individuals included in the list. Full details of accounts bearing 
resemblance with any of the individuals/entities in the list should immediately 
be intimated to RBI and FIU-IND. 
 
c)  Banks are also advised to take into account risks arising from the deficiencies 
in AML/CFT regime of certain jurisdictions viz. Iran, Uzbekistan, Pakistan, 
Turkmenistan and Sao Tome and Principe, as identified in FATF Statement of 
February 25, 2009 circulated  to banks vide our circular letter DBOD.AML. 
No.20716/14.01.027/2008-09 dated June 03, 2009. 
2.12 Correspondent Banking 
 
a) Correspondent banking is the provision of banking services by one 
bank (the вҖңcorrespondent bankвҖқ) to another bank (the вҖңrespondent bankвҖқ). These 
services may include cash/funds management, international wire transfers, 
drawing arrangements for demand drafts and mail transfers, payable-through-
accounts, cheques clearing etc. Banks should gather sufficient information to 
understand fully the nature of the business of the correspondent/respondent 
bank. Information on the other bankвҖҷs management, major business activities, 
 
 
20
 
 
level of AML/CFT compliance, purpose of opening the account, identity of any 
third party entities that will use the correspondent banking services, 
and regulatory/supervisory framework in the correspondent's/respondentвҖҷs 
country may be of special relevance. Similarly, banks should try to ascertain from 
publicly available information whether the other bank has been subject to any 
money laundering or terrorist financing investigation or regulatory action. While it 
is desirable that such relationships should be established only with the approval 
of the Board, in case the Boards of some banks wish to delegate the power to 
an administrative authority, they may delegate the power to a committee 
headed by the Chairman/CEO of the bank while laying down clear parameters for 
approving such relationships. Proposals approved by the Committee should 
invariably be put up to the Board at its next meeting for post facto approval. The 
responsibilities of each bank with whom correspondent banking relationship is 
established should be clearly documented. In the case of payable-through-
accounts, the correspondent bank should be satisfied that the respondent bank 
has verified the identity of the customers having direct access to the accounts 
and is undertaking ongoing 'due diligence' on them. The correspondent bank 
should also ensure that the respondent bank is able to provide the relevant 
customer identification data immediately on request. 
 
b) Correspondent relationship with a вҖңShell BankвҖқ 
 
Banks should refuse to enter into a correspondent relationship with a вҖңshell bankвҖқ 
(i.e. a bank which is incorporated in a country where it has no physical presence 
and is unaffiliated to any regulated financial group). Shell banks are not permitted 
to operate in India. Banks should also guard against establishing relationships 
with respondent foreign financial institutions that permit their accounts to be used 
by shell banks. Banks should be extremely cautious while continuing relationships 
with respondent banks located in countries with poor KYC standards and 
countries identified as 'non-cooperative' in the fight against money laundering 
and terrorist financing. Banks should ensure that their respondent banks have 
anti money laundering policies and procedures in place and apply enhanced 
 
 
21
 
 
'due diligence' procedures for transactions carried out through the correspondent 
accounts. 
 
 
2.13   Applicability to branches and subsidiaries outside India 
 
 
The guidelines contained in this master circular shall apply to the branches and 
majority owned subsidiaries located abroad, especially, in countries which do 
not or insufficiently apply the FATF Recommendations, to the extent local laws 
permit. When local applicable laws and regulations prohibit implementation of 
these guidelines, the same should be brought to the notice of Reserve Bank. In 
case there is a variance in KYC/AML standards prescribed by the Reserve 
Bank and the host country regulators, branches/overseas subsidiaries of banks 
are required to adopt the more stringent regulation of the two. 
 
 
 
2.14   Wire Transfer  
Banks use wire transfers as an expeditious method for transferring funds 
between bank accounts. Wire transfers include transactions occurring within the 
national boundaries of a country or from one country to another. As wire transfers 
do not involve actual movement of currency, they are considered as a rapid and 
secure method for transferring value from one location to another. 
i) The salient features of a wire transfer transaction are as under: 
a) Wire transfer is a transaction carried out on behalf of an originator 
person (both natural and legal) through a bank by electronic means with 
a view to making an amount of money available to a beneficiary person at a 
bank. The originator and the beneficiary may be the same person. 
b) Cross-border transfer means any wire transfer where the originator 
and the beneficiary bank or financial institutions are located in different 
countries. It may include any chain of wire transfers that has at least one 
 
 
22
 
 
cross-border element. 
c)   Domestic wire transfer means any wire transfer where the originator and 
receiver are located in the same country. It may also include a chain of 
wire transfers that takes place entirely within the borders of a single 
country even though the system used to effect the wire transfer may be 
located in another country. 
d) The originator is the account holder, or where there is no account, the 
person (natural or legal) that places the order with the bank to perform 
the wire transfer. 
ii)  Wire transfer is an instantaneous and most preferred route for transfer of 
funds across the globe and hence, there is a need for preventing terrorists and 
other criminals from having unfettered access to wire transfers for moving their 
funds and for detecting any misuse when it occurs. This can be achieved if basic 
information on the originator of wire transfers is immediately available to 
appropriate law enforcement and/or prosecutorial authorities in order to assist 
them in detecting, investigating, prosecuting terrorists or other criminals and 
tracing their assets. The information can be used by Financial Intelligence 
Unit - India (FIU-IND) for analysing suspicious or unusual activity and 
disseminating it as necessary. The originator information can also be put to use 
by the beneficiary bank to facilitate identification and reporting of suspicious 
transactions to FIU-IND. Owing to the potential terrorist financing threat posed 
by small wire transfers, the objective is to be in a position to trace all wire 
transfers with minimum threshold limits. Accordingly, banks must ensure that all 
wire transfers are accompanied by the following information: 
( A ) Cross-border wire transfers 
i) All cross-border wire transfers must be accompanied by accurate 
and meaningful originator information. 
ii) Information accompanying cross-border wire transfers must 
 
 
23
 
 
contain the name and address of the originator and where an 
account exists, the number of that account. In the absence of an 
account, a unique reference number, as prevalent in the country 
concerned, must be included. 
iii) Where several individual transfers from a single originator are 
bundled in a batch file for transmission to beneficiaries in another 
country, they may be exempted from including full originator 
information, provided they include the originatorвҖҷs account number 
or unique reference number as at (ii) above. 
 
 
( B )  Domestic wire transfers 
             
i) Information accompanying all domestic wire transfers of 
Rs.50000/- (Rupees Fifty Thousand) and above must include 
complete originator information i.e. name, address and 
account number etc., unless full originator information can be 
made available to the beneficiary bank by other means. 
ii) If a bank has reason to believe that a customer is intentionally 
structuring wire transfer to below Rs. 50000/- (Rupees Fifty 
Thousand) to several beneficiaries in order to avoid reporting or 
monitoring, the bank must insist on complete customer 
identification before effecting the transfer. In case of non-
cooperation from the customer, efforts should be made to establish 
his identity and Suspicious Transaction Report (STR) should be 
made to FIU-IND. 
 
iii) When a credit or debit card is used to effect money transfer, 
necessary information as (i) above should be included in the 
message. 
 
 
24
 
 
(iii)   Exemptions 
 
Interbank transfers and settlements where both the originator and 
beneficiary are banks or financial institutions would be exempted from the 
above requirements. 
 
 
(iv)    Role of Ordering, Intermediary and Beneficiary banks 
 
 
 (a)   Ordering Bank  
 
An ordering bank is the one that originates a wire transfer as per the 
order placed by its customer. The ordering bank must ensure that 
qualifying wire transfers contain complete originator information. The bank 
must also verify and preserve the information at least for a period of ten 
years. 
 
(b)   Intermediary bank 
 
For both cross-border and domestic wire transfers, a bank processing 
an intermediary element of a chain of wire transfers must ensure that all 
originator information accompanying a wire transfer is retained with the 
transfer. Where technical limitations prevent full originator information 
accompanying a cross-border wire transfer from remaining with a 
related domestic wire transfer, a record must be kept at least for ten 
years (as required under Prevention of Money Laundering Act, 2002) by 
the receiving intermediary bank of all the information received from the 
ordering bank. 
 
 
( c)  Beneficiary bank 
 
A beneficiary bank should have effective risk-based procedures in place 
to identify wire transfers lacking complete originator information. The lack 
 
 
25
 
 
of complete originator information may be considered as a factor in 
assessing whether a wire transfer or related transactions are suspicious and 
whether they should be reported to the Financial Intelligence Unit-India. 
The beneficiary bank should also take up the matter with the ordering bank if 
a transaction is not accompanied by detailed information of the fund 
remitter. If the ordering bank fails to furnish information on the remitter, 
the beneficiary bank should consider restricting or even terminating its 
business relationship with the ordering bank. 
 
 
 
2.15   Principal Officer 
a) Banks should appoint a senior management officer to be designated as 
Principal Officer. Principal Officer shall be located at the head/corporate 
office of the bank and shall be responsible for monitoring and reporting of 
all transactions and sharing of information as required under the law. He will 
maintain close liaison with enforcement agencies, banks and any other 
institution which are involved in the fight against money laundering and 
combating financing of terrorism. 
b) The Principal Officer will be responsible for timely submission of CTR, STR 
and reporting of counterfeit notes to FIU-IND. 
 
2.16 Maintenance of records of transactions/Information to be 
preserved/Maintenance and preservation of records/Cash and Suspicious 
transactions reporting to Financial Intelligence Unit- India (FIU-IND) 
 
Government of India, Ministry of Finance, Department of Revenue, vide its 
notification dated July 1, 2005 in the Gazette of India, has notified the Rules 
under the Prevention of Money Laundering Act (PMLA), 2002. In terms of the 
said Rules, the provisions of PMLA, 2002 came into effect from July 1, 2005. 
Section 12 of the PMLA, 2002 casts certain obligations on the banking 
 
 
26
 
 
companies in regard to preservation and reporting of customer account 
information. Banks are, therefore, advised to go through the provisions of 
PMLA, 2002 and the Rules notified there under and take all steps considered 
necessary to ensure compliance with the requirements of Section 12 of the Act 
ibid. 
(i) Maintenance of records of transactions 
Banks should introduce a system of maintaining proper record of transactions 
prescribed under Rule 3, as mentioned below: 
a)  all cash transactions of the value of more than Rupees Ten Lakh or its 
equivalent in foreign currency; 
b) all series of cash transactions integrally connected to each other which 
have been valued below Rupees Ten Lakh or its equivalent in foreign 
currency where such series of transactions have taken place within a 
month and the aggregate value of such transactions exceeds Rupees 
Ten Lakh; 
c) all cash transactions where forged or counterfeit currency notes or bank 
notes have been used as genuine and where any forgery of a valuable 
security or a document has taken place facilitating the transaction and 
d) all suspicious transactions whether or not made in cash and by way of 
as mentioned in the Rules. 
Explanation - Integrally connected cash transactions referred to at (b) 
above  
The following transactions have taken place in a branch during the 
month of April , 2008: 
 
 
 
 
27
 
 
Date 
Mode 
Dr (in Rs.) 
Cr (in Rs.) 
Balance (in 
Rs.) BF - 
8,00,000.00 
02/04/2008 
Cash 
5,00,000.00 
3,00,000.00 
6,00,000.00
07/04/2008 
Cash 
40,000.00
2,00,000.00 
7,60,000.00
08/04/2008 
Cash 
4,70,000.00 
1,00,000.00 
3,90,000.00
Monthly 
summation 
 
10,10,000.00
6,00,000.00 
 
 
 
f) As per above clarification, the debit transactions in the above example are 
integrally connected cash transactions because total cash debits during 
the calendar month exceeds Rs. 10 lakhs. However, the bank should 
report only the debit transaction taken place on 02/04 & 08/04/2008. 
The debit transaction dated 07/04/2008 should not be separately 
reported by the bank, which is less than Rs.50,000/-. 
 
g)   All the credit transactions in the above example would not be treated as 
integrally connected, as the sum total of the credit transactions during 
the month does not exceed Rs.10 lakh and hence credit transaction 
dated 02, 07 & 08/04/2008 should not be reported by banks. 
 
 
(ii) Information  to be preserved 
 
Banks are required to maintain the following information in respect of 
transactions referred to in Rule 3: 
  
a)  the nature of the transactions; 
b) the amount of the transaction and the currency in which it was  
 
 
28
 
 
denominated;  
c) the date on which the transaction was conducted; and 
d)  the parties to the transaction 
 
(iii) Maintenance  and Preservation  of record 
 
a) Banks are required to maintain the records containing information in 
respect of transactions referred to in Rule 3 above. Banks should take 
appropriate steps to evolve a system for proper maintenance and preservation 
of account information in a manner that allows data to be retrieved easily and 
quickly whenever required or when requested by the competent authorities. 
Further, banks should maintain for at least ten years from the date of cessation of 
transaction between the bank and the client, all necessary records of 
transactions, both domestic or international, which will permit reconstruction of 
individual transactions (including the amounts and types of currency involved if 
any) so as to provide, if necessary, evidence for prosecution of persons involved 
in criminal activity. 
 
b) 
Banks should ensure that records pertaining to the identification of the 
customer and his address (e.g. copies of documents like passports, identity cards, 
driving licenses, PAN card, utility bills etc.) obtained while opening the account 
and during the course of business relationship, are properly preserved for at 
least ten years after the business relationship is ended. The identification 
records and transaction data should be made available to the competent 
authorities upon request. 
 
c)  In paragraph 2.7 of this Master Circular, banks have been advised to pay 
special attention to all complex, unusual large transactions and all unusual 
patterns of transactions, which have no apparent economic or visible lawful 
purpose. 
It 
is 
further 
clarified 
that 
the 
background 
including 
all 
documents/office records/memorandums pertaining to such transactions and 
 
 
29
 
 
purpose thereof should, as far as possible, be examined and the findings at 
branch as well as Principal Officer level should be properly recorded. Such 
records and related documents should be made available to help auditors in their 
day-to-day work relating to scrutiny of transactions and also to Reserve 
Bank/other relevant authorities. These records are required to be preserved for 
ten years as is required under PMLA, 2002. 
 
(iv)   Reporting to Financial Intelligence Unit - India 
 
a)  In terms of the PMLA rules, banks are required to report information relating to 
cash and suspicious transactions to the Director, Financial Intelligence Unit-
India (FIU-IND) in respect of transactions referred to in Rule 3 at the following 
address: 
Director, FIU-IND, 
Financial Intelligence Unit-India, 
6th Floor, Hotel Samrat, 
Chanakyapuri, 
New Delhi-110021. 
Website - http://fiuindia.gov.in/ 
 
 
b)  Banks should carefully go through all the reporting formats. There are 
altogether eight reporting formats, as detailed in Annex II, viz. i) Cash 
Transactions Report (CTR); ii) Summary of CTR iii) Electronic File Structure-
CTR; iv) Suspicious Transactions Report (STR); v) Electronic File Structure-
STR; vi) Counterfeit Currency Report (CCR); vii) Summary of CCR and viii) 
Electronic File Structure-CCR. The reporting formats contain detailed 
guidelines on the compilation and manner/procedure of submission of the 
reports to FIU-IND. It would be necessary for banks to initiate urgent steps to 
ensure electronic filing of all types of reports to FIU-IND. The related hardware 
and technical requirement for preparing reports in an electronic format, the 
related data files and data structures thereof are furnished in the instructions part 
of the concerned formats. 
 
 
 
30
 
 
c)    FIU-IND have placed on their website editable electronic utilities to enable 
banks to file electronic CTR/STR who are yet to install/adopt suitable 
technological tools for extracting CTR/STR from their live transaction data base. 
It is, therefore, advised that in cases of banks, where all the branches are not fully 
computerized, the Principal Officer of the bank should cull out the transaction 
details from branches which are not yet computerized and suitably arrange to 
feed the data into an electronic file with the help of the editable electronic 
utilities of CTR/STR as have been made available by FIU-IND in their website 
http://fiuindia.gov.in.
 
 
d)  In terms of instructions contained in paragraph 2.3(b) of this Master Circular, 
banks are required to prepare a profile for each customer based on risk 
categorisation. Further, vide paragraph 2.7, the need for periodical review of risk 
categorisation has been emphasized. It is, therefore, reiterated that banks, as a 
part of transaction monitoring mechanism, are required to put in place an 
appropriate software application to throw alerts when the transactions are 
inconsistent with risk categorization and updated profile of customers. It is 
needless to add that a robust software throwing alerts is essential for effective 
identification and reporting of suspicious transaction. 
 
 
2.17   Cash and Suspicious Transaction Reports  
 
a)   Cash Transaction Report ( CTR ) 
While detailed instructions for filing all types of reports are given in the 
instructions part of the related formats, banks should scrupulously adhere to the 
following: 
i)  The Cash Transaction Report (CTR) for each month should be submitted 
to FIU-IND by 15th of the succeeding month. Cash transaction reporting 
by branches to their controlling offices should, therefore, invariably be 
submitted on monthly basis (not on fortnightly basis) and banks should 
 
 
31
 
 
ensure to submit CTR for every month to FIU-IND within the prescribed 
time schedule. 
ii) All cash transactions, where forged or counterfeit Indian currency notes 
have been used as genuine should be reported by the Principal Officer to 
FIU-IND immediately in the specified format (Counterfeit Currency 
Report вҖ“ CCR). These cash transactions should also include transactions 
where forgery of valuable security or documents has taken place and may 
be reported to FIU-IND in plain text form. 
 
iii) While filing CTR, details of individual transactions below Rupees Fifty 
thousand   need not be furnished. 
iv) CTR should contain only the transactions carried out by the bank on behalf 
of their clients/customers excluding transactions between the internal 
accounts of the bank. 
       v)  A summary of cash transaction report for the bank as a whole should be 
compiled by the Principal Officer of the bank every month in physical 
form as per the format specified. The summary should be signed by the 
Principal Officer and submitted to FIU-India.  
vi) In case of Cash Transaction Reports (CTR) compiled centrally by banks 
for the branches having Core Banking Solution (CBS) at their central data 
centre level, banks may generate centralised Cash Transaction Reports 
(CTR) in respect of branches under core banking solution at one point for 
onward transmission to FIU-IND, provided:  
a) The CTR is generated in the format prescribed by Reserve Bank in 
Para 2.16(iv)(b) of Master Circular on Know Your Customer 
(KYC) 
norms 
/Anti-Money 
Laundering 
(AML) 
standards/ 
Combating of Financing of Terrorism (CFT)/Obligation of banks 
under PMLA, 2002 dated July 01, 2009;    
 
 
32
 
 
b)  A copy of the monthly CTR submitted on its behalf to FIU-India is 
available 
at 
the 
concerned 
branch 
for 
production 
to 
auditors/inspectors, when asked for; and  
c) The instruction on вҖҳMaintenance of records of transactionsвҖҷ; 
вҖҳInformation to be preservedвҖҷ and  вҖҳMaintenance and Preservation 
of recordsвҖҷ as contained above in this master circular at Para 2.16 
(i), (ii) and (iii) respectively are scrupulously followed by the 
branch. 
However, in respect of branches not under CBS, the monthly CTR should 
continue to be compiled and forwarded by the branch to the Principal Officer for 
onward transmission to FIU-IND. 
b) Suspicious Transaction Reports (STR) 
i) While determining suspicious transactions, banks should be guided by 
definition of suspicious transaction contained in PMLA Rules as amended 
from time to time. 
ii) It is likely that in some cases transactions are abandoned/aborted by 
customers on being asked to give some details or to provide documents. 
It is clarified that banks should report all such attempted transactions in 
STRs, even if not completed by customers, irrespective of the amount of 
the transaction. 
iii) Banks should make STRs if they have reasonable ground to believe that 
the transaction involve proceeds of crime generally irrespective of the 
amount of transaction and/or the threshold limit envisaged for predicate 
offences in part B of Schedule of PMLA, 2002 . 
iv) The Suspicious Transaction Report (STR) should be furnished within 7 
days of arriving at a conclusion that any transaction, whether cash or 
non-cash, or a series of transactions integrally connected are of 
suspicious nature. The Principal Officer should record his reasons for 
 
 
33
 
 
treating any transaction or a series of transactions as suspicious. It should 
be ensured that there is no undue delay in arriving at such a conclusion 
once a suspicious transaction report is received from a branch or any 
other office. Such report should be made available to the competent 
authorities on request. 
v) In the context of creating KYC/AML awareness among the staff and 
for generating alerts for suspicious transactions, banks may consider the 
indicative list of suspicious activities contained in Annex-E of the 'IBA's 
Guidance Note for Banks, 2005'. 
vi) Banks should not put any restrictions on operations in the accounts 
where an STR has been made. Moreover, it should be ensured that 
there is no tipping off to the customer at any level. 
 
 
2.18   Customer Education/Employee's Training/Employee's Hiring 
 
 
a)       Customer Education 
 
Implementation of KYC procedures requires banks to demand certain information 
from customers which may be of personal nature or which has hitherto never 
been called for. This can sometimes lead to a lot of questioning by the customer 
as to the motive and purpose of collecting such information. There is, therefore, a 
need for banks to prepare specific literature/ pamphlets etc. so as to educate the 
customer of the objectives of the KYC programme. The front desk staff needs to 
be specially trained to handle such situations while dealing with customers. 
 
b)       Employee's Training 
 
 
Banks must have an ongoing employee training programme so that the members 
of the staff are adequately trained in KYC procedures. Training requirements 
should have different focuses for frontline staff, compliance staff and staff 
dealing with new customers. It is crucial that all those concerned fully understand 
the rationale behind the KYC policies and implement them consistently. 
 
 
34
 
 
 
 
c)       Hiring of Employees 
It may be appreciated that KYC norms/AML standards/CFT measures have 
been prescribed to ensure that criminals are not allowed to misuse the banking 
channels. It would, therefore, be necessary that adequate screening mechanism 
is put in place by banks as an integral part of their recruitment/hiring process of 
personnel. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
35
 
 
Annex- I
Customer Identification Procedure 
Features to be verified and documents that may be obtained from 
customers 
Features 
Documents 
Accounts of individuals 
 
- 
Legal name and any other 
names used   
 
 
 
 
 
 
- 
Correct permanent address 
 
 
(i) Passport  (ii) PAN card (iii) VoterвҖҷs 
Identity Card (iv) Driving licence  
(v) Identity card (subject to the bankвҖҷs 
satisfaction) 
(vi) 
Letter 
from 
a 
recognized public authority or public 
servant 
verifying 
the 
identity 
and 
residence of the customer to the 
satisfaction of bank 
 
(i) Telephone bill (ii) Bank account 
statement 
(iii) 
Letter 
from 
any 
recognized public authority  
(iv) Electricity bill (v) Ration card  
(vi) Letter from employer (subject to 
satisfaction of the bank) 
( any one document which provides 
customer information to the satisfaction 
of the bank will suffice )     
Accounts of companies 
- 
Name of the company 
- 
Principal place of business  
- 
Mailing 
address 
of 
the 
company 
- 
Telephone/Fax Number 
 
(i) Certificate of incorporation and 
Memorandum & Articles of Association 
(ii) Resolution of the Board of Directors 
to open an account and identification of 
those who have authority to operate 
the account (iii) Power of Attorney 
 
 
36
 
 
granted to its managers, officers or 
employees to transact business on its 
behalf (iv) Copy of PAN allotment letter 
(v) Copy of the telephone bill 
Accounts of partnership firms 
- 
Legal name 
- 
Address 
- 
Names of all partners and 
their addresses 
- 
Telephone numbers of the 
firm and partners 
 
(i) Registration certificate, if registered  
(ii) Partnership deed (iii) Power of 
Attorney granted to a partner or an 
employee of the firm to transact 
business on its behalf (iv) Any officially 
valid document identifying the partners 
and the persons holding the Power of 
Attorney 
and 
their 
addresses 
(v) 
Telephone 
bill 
in 
the 
name 
of 
firm/partners 
Accounts of trusts & foundations 
- 
Names of trustees, settlers, 
beneficiaries and signatories 
 
- 
Names and addresses of the 
founder, the 
managers/directors and the 
beneficiaries 
- 
Telephone/fax numbers 
 
 
(i) 
Certificate 
of 
registration, 
if 
registered 
(ii) 
Power 
of 
Attorney 
granted to transact business on its 
behalf (iii) Any officially valid document 
to 
identify 
the 
trustees, 
settlors, 
beneficiaries and those holding Power 
of 
Attorney, 
founders/managers/ 
directors and their addresses  
(iv) Resolution of the managing body of 
the foundation/association  
(v) Telephone bill 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
37
 
 
Annex вҖ“ II 
 
(List of various reports and their formats) 
 
1. Cash Transaction Report (CTR) 
2. Summary of CTR  
3. Electronic File Structure - CTR 
4. Suspicious Transaction Report (STR) 
5. Electronic File Structure - STR 
6. Counterfeit Currency Report (CCR) 
7. Summary of CCR 
8. Electronic File Structure - CCR 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
38
 
 
ANNEX - III 
(List of Circulars on вҖҳKnow your customerвҖҷ and monitoring of cash 
transactions) 
 
Sr.
No. 
 Circular 
No. 
and date 
 
Subject 
Gist of instructions 
1 
 DBOD.BP.BC.92
/C.469-76 dated 
12th 
August, 
1976 
 Issue of DDs/TTs 
in 
excess 
of 
Rs.5000/- 
Applicants (whether customer or 
not) 
for 
DD/MT/TT/Travellers 
cheques for amount  exceeding 
Rs.10,000/- 
should 
affix 
Permanent Income Tax Number 
on the application. 
2 
 DBOD.GC.BC.6
2/c.408(A)/87  
dated 
11th 
November, 1987 
 Frauds in banks-
opening of new 
accounts. 
Payment for imports should be 
made by debit to the accounts 
maintained with the same bank or 
any other bank and under no 
circumstances cash should be 
accepted for retirement of import 
bills. There should be reasonable 
gap of say, 6 months between the 
time an introducer opens his 
account and introduces another 
prospective account holder to the 
bank. Introduction of an account  
should enable proper identification 
of the person opening an account 
so that the person can be traced if 
the account is misused.   
3 
 DBOD.BP.BC.11
4/C.469 (81)-91 
dated 19th April, 
 Misuse of banking 
channels 
for 
violation of fiscal 
Banks 
to 
issue 
 
travellers 
cheques, demand drafts, mail 
transfers, telegraphic transfers for 
 
 
39
 
 
Sr.
No. 
 Circular 
No. 
and date 
 
Subject 
Gist of instructions 
1991 
laws and evasion 
of taxes вҖ“ Issue 
and payment of 
demand drafts for 
Rs.50,000 
and 
above. 
Rs. 50,000/- and above by debit to 
customers accounts or against 
cheques only and not against 
cash. 
4 
 DBOD.BC.20/17.
04.001/92 dated 
25th August, 
1992 
 Committee 
to 
enquire 
into 
various 
aspects 
relating to frauds 
and malpractices 
in banks. 
Banks advised to adhere to the 
prescribed norms and safeguards 
while opening accounts etc. 
5 
 DBOD.BP.BC.60
/21.01.023/92  
dated 
21st 
December,1992 
 Diversion 
of 
working 
capital 
funds. 
Banks to ensure that withdrawals 
from 
cash 
credit/overdraft 
accounts 
are 
strictly 
for 
the 
purpose for which the credit limits 
were sanctioned by them.  There 
should be no diversion of working 
capital finance for acquisition of 
fixed assets, investments  in 
associate companies/ subsidiaries 
and 
acquisition 
of 
shares, 
debentures, units of UTI and other 
mutual 
funds 
and 
other 
investments in the capital market. 
6 
 DBOD.FMC.No.
153/27.01.003/9
3-94 dated 1st  
September,1993 
 Monitoring of flow 
of funds. 
Banks to be vigilant and ensure 
proper 
end 
use 
of 
bank 
funds/monitoring flow of funds. 
Banks to keep vigil over heavy 
 
 
40
 
 
Sr.
No. 
 Circular 
No. 
and date 
 
Subject 
Gist of instructions 
 
 
 
cash 
withdrawals 
by 
account 
holders 
which 
may 
be 
disproportionate to their normal 
trade/business requirements and  
cases of unusual trends. Doubtful 
cases to be reported to DBOD, 
Regional office. 
7 
 DBOD.GC.BC.1
93/17.04.001/93 
dated  18th 
November, 1993 
 Frauds in banks вҖ“ 
Encashment 
of 
Interest/Dividend 
Warrants, Refund 
Orders etc. 
Banks to be vigilant in opening 
new 
accounts 
without 
proper 
introduction, new accounts with 
fictitious names and addresses. 
Banks instructed to strictly adhere 
to the instructions issued on 
opening  and operating of bank 
accounts. 
8 
 DBOD.GC.BC.2
02/17.04.001/93 
dated 6th 
December, 1993 
 The Committee to 
enquire 
into 
various 
aspects 
relating to frauds 
and malpractices 
in banks. 
Customer 
identification 
while 
opening 
accounts 
including 
obtaining 
of 
photographs 
of 
customers 
while 
opening 
accounts. 
9 
 
 
 
 
 
 DBOD.No.GC.B
C.46/17.04.001 
dated 22nd April, 
1994 
 The Committee to 
enquire 
into 
various 
aspects 
relating to frauds 
and malpractices 
in banks. 
Clarifications 
given 
to 
banks 
regarding obtaining photographs 
of the depositors/account holder 
authorised 
to 
operate 
new 
accounts 
with 
effect 
from 
1.1.1994. 
 
Obtaining 
of 
photographs 
would 
apply 
to 
residents and non-residents and 
 
 
41
 
 
Sr.
No. 
 Circular 
No. 
and date 
 
Subject 
Gist of instructions 
all categories of deposits including 
fixed/recurring/cumulative deposit 
accounts 
and 
also 
to 
those 
persons authorised to operate the 
accounts.  
10 
 DBOD.BP.BC.10
6/21.01.001/94  
dated 
23rd 
September,1994 
 Fraudulent 
operations 
in 
deposit accounts-
opening 
and 
collection 
of 
cheques/pay 
orders etc. 
Banks to examine every request 
for opening joint accounts very 
carefully, look into the purpose, 
other relevant aspects relating to 
business, the financial position of 
the account holders and whether 
number of account holders are 
large. вҖҳGenerally crossedвҖҷ cheques 
and payable toвҖҳ orderвҖҷ should be 
collected 
only 
on 
proper 
endorsement by the payee. Banks 
to  exercise care in collection of 
cheques of large amounts and 
ensure that joint accounts are not 
used for benami transactions.  
11 
 DBOD.BP.BC.57
/21.01.001/95 
dated 4th May, 
1995 
 Frauds in banks вҖ“ 
Monitoring 
of 
deposit accounts. 
Banks to introduce system of 
close watch of  new deposit 
accounts and monitoring of cash 
withdrawals 
and 
deposits 
for 
Rs.10 lakh and above in deposit, 
cash 
credit 
and 
overdraft 
accounts.  Banks to keep record 
of details of these large cash 
transactions in a separate register.
 
 
42
 
 
Sr.
No. 
 Circular 
No. 
and date 
 
Subject 
Gist of instructions 
12 
 DBOD.BP.BC.10
2/21.01.001/95 
dated 20th 
September, 
1995 
 Monitoring 
of 
Deposit Accounts.
Reporting of all cash deposits and 
withdrawals of Rs.10 lakhs and 
above with full details in fortnightly 
statements by bank branches to 
their 
controlling 
offices. 
Transactions of suspicious nature 
to be apprised to Head Office. RBI 
to look into these statements at 
the time of inspections 
13 
 DBOD.BP.BC.42
/21.01.001/96 
dated 6th April, 
1996 
 Monitoring 
cash 
deposits 
and 
withdrawals 
of 
Rs.10 lakh and 
above 
in 
deposit/other 
accounts. 
Banks asked to submit feedback 
on implementation of the system 
of close monitoring of large cash 
deposits and withdrawals of Rs.10 
lakh and above. 
14 
 DBOD.No.BP.B
C.12/21.01.023/
98 
dated 
11th 
February 1998 
 Furnishing 
of 
data-violation 
of 
secrecy 
obligations. 
Banks should satisfy themselves 
that information sought will not 
violate the laws relating to secrecy 
in banking transactions except 
under  compulsion of law, duty to 
the public to disclose, where 
interest 
of 
bank 
requires 
disclosure and where disclosure is 
made with the express or implied 
consent of the customer. 
15 
 DBS.FGV.BC.56
.23.04.001/98-99 
dated 21st June, 
 Report 
of 
the 
Study Group on 
Large Value Bank 
Banks advised to implement the  
main recommendations of the 
Study Group on Large Value Bank 
 
 
43
 
 
Sr.
No. 
 Circular 
No. 
and date 
 
Subject 
Gist of instructions 
1999 
Frauds. 
Frauds. 
16 
 DBOD.COMP.B
C.No.130/07.03.
23/2000-01 
dated 14th June, 
2001 
 
 
 Internet 
Banking 
in 
India-
Guidelines. 
Banking facilities on Internet will 
be 
subject 
to 
the 
existing 
regulatory 
framework. 
Banks 
having physical presence in India 
only will be allowed to offer 
banking services over Internet to 
residents in India  and any cross 
border transactions will be subject 
to 
existing 
exchange 
control 
regulations. Banks to establish 
identity and also make enquiries  
about integrity and reputation of 
the prospective customer. Internet 
accounts should be opened only 
after 
proper 
introduction 
and 
physical verification of the identity 
of the customer.   
17 
 DBOD.BP.52/21.
01.001/2001-02 
dated 
5th 
December, 2001 
 Prevention 
of 
Terrorism 
Ordinance,2001-
Implementation 
thereof. 
Banks should keep a watchful eye 
on the transactions of the 23 
terrorist organisations listed in the 
Schedule 
to 
the 
Ordinance. 
Violations of the extant Acts or 
normal banking operations must 
be reported to  the appropriate 
authorities under the Ordinance 
under advice to RBI. Banks to 
undertake 
вҖҳdue 
diligenceвҖҷ 
in 
respect of the вҖҳKYCвҖҷ principle.   
 
 
44
 
 
Sr.
No. 
 Circular 
No. 
and date 
 
Subject 
Gist of instructions 
 
18 
 DBOD.AML.BC.
89/14.01.001/20
01-02 dated 15th 
April, 2002 
 Freezing of funds 
pursuant 
to 
United 
Nations 
Security 
Council 
Resolution, 1390. 
Accounts 
of 
individuals 
and 
entities 
listed 
should 
be 
immediately frozen as informed by 
the Security Council Sanctions 
Committee of the UN. If any 
transaction is detected involving 
any of these entities, banks to 
report 
to 
RBI 
promptly 
for 
necessary action. 
 
19 
 DBOD.AML.BC.
No.102/14.01.00
1/2001-02  dated 
10th May,2002 
 Monitoring 
of 
accounts 
- 
compliance 
with 
instructions. 
Banks should ensure  that no new 
accounts are opened by banned 
organisations. Banks to strictly 
adhere to the extant guidelines 
regarding opening and monitoring 
of accounts. Banks to confirm 
having 
issued 
instructions 
for 
immediate  compliance by the 
branches and controlling offices. 
20 
 DBOD.AML.BC.
18/14.01.001/20
02-03 dated          
August 16, 2002   
 
 Guidelines 
on 
"Know 
Your 
Customer"  
norms  and вҖңCash 
transactionsвҖқ 
 
First 
circular 
on 
KYC. 
The 
customer 
identification 
should 
entail 
verification 
through 
an 
introductory reference from an 
existing account holder/a person 
known to the bank or on the basis 
of documents provided by the 
customer. The Board of Directors 
of the banks should have in place 
 
 
45
 
 
Sr.
No. 
 Circular 
No. 
and date 
 
Subject 
Gist of instructions 
adequate policies that establish 
procedures to verify the bonafide 
identification 
of 
individual/ 
corporates opening an account. 
Branches of banks are required to 
report all cash deposits and 
withdrawals of Rs.10 lakhs and 
above as well as transactions of 
suspicious nature with full details 
in fortnightly statements to their 
controlling offices.  
21 
 DBOD.NO.AML.
BC.58/14.01.001
/2004-05 
dated  
November 
29, 
2004
 
 
 'Know 
Your 
Customer' (KYC) 
Guidelines вҖ“  
Anti 
Money 
Laundering 
Standards 
Our guidelines were revisited to 
make those compliant with  FATF 
recommendations 
and 
Basel 
Committee Report on CDD. Four 
pronged approach was prescribed 
to banks based on Customer 
Acceptance 
Policy, 
Customer 
Identification 
Procedure, 
Monitoring of Transaction and 
Risk Management. 
22 
 DBOD.NO.AML.
BC.28 
/14.01.001/2005-
06 dated August 
23, 2005
 Know 
Your 
Customer 
Guidelines- Anti-
Money 
Laundering 
Standards 
KYC guidelines on document 
requirement 
were 
relaxed 
for 
people belonging to financially 
disadvantageous sections in the 
society, who could open account 
with introductory reference.  
 
 
46
 
 
Sr.
No. 
 Circular 
No. 
and date 
 
Subject 
Gist of instructions 
23 
 DBOD.NO.AML.
BC.63/14.01.001
/2005-06 
dated  
February 
15, 
2006
 
 Prevention 
of 
Money 
Laundering  Act, 
2002 вҖ“ Obligation 
of banks in terms 
of Rules notified 
thereunder 
Reporting mechanism and formats 
were prescribed to banks to report 
cash and suspicious transactions 
to Financial Intelligence Unit- India 
(FIU-IND). 
24 
 DBOD.AML.BC. 
No.77/ 
14.01.001 / 
2006-07                
April 13, 2007
 
 
 Wire transfers 
Banks were advised to ensure 
that all wire transfers involving 
domestic and cross boarder fund 
transfers are accompanied by full 
originator information. 
25 
 DBOD.AML.BC.
No. 63/ 
14.01.001/2007-
08  dated 
February 18, 
2008
 Know 
Your 
Customer (KYC) 
Norms/Anti 
Money 
Laundering (AML) 
Standards/Comba
ting of Financing 
of 
Terrorism 
(CFT) 
Revised guidelines on KYC/AML 
issued 
on 
review 
of 
risk 
categorization 
of 
customers; 
periodical updation of customer 
identification data and screening 
mechanism for recruitment /hiring 
process of personnel. 
 
 
47
 
 
Sr.
No. 
 Circular 
No. 
and date 
 
Subject 
Gist of instructions 
26 
 DBOD.AML.BC.
No. 85/ 
14.01.001/  2007 
-08 dated May 
22, 2008
 Prevention 
of 
Money 
Laundering 
Act, 
2002 вҖ“ Obligation 
of banks in terms 
of Rules notified 
thereunder. 
Revised guidelines issued on  
CTR and STR by banks to FIU-
IND.  
 
27 
 DBOD.AML.BC.
No.12/14.01.001
/2008-09 dated 
July 1, 2008
 Master Circular вҖ“
KYC norms/AML 
Standards/CFT/ 
Obligation 
of 
Banks 
under 
PMLA, 2002  
The Master Circular consolidates all 
the guidelines issued by Reserve 
Bank of India on KYC/AML/CFT 
norms up to June 30, 2008 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
