 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Framework for recognising Self-Regulatory Organisations 
(SROs) for the Account Aggregator Ecosystem 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Department of Regulation 
Reserve Bank of India 
March 12, 2025 
 
 
 
Table of Contents 
 
Chapter I – Preliminary ..................................................................................................... 1 
Chapter II – SRO-AA - Characteristics and Objectives .................................................. 2 
Chapter III – SRO-AA - Eligibility Criteria and Membership .......................................... 4 
Chapter IV – SRO - AA – Governance and Management ............................................... 6 
Chapter V – SRO-AA - Functions and Responsibilities ................................................. 8 
Chapter VI – SRO – AA – Application Process ............................................................. 12 
 
 
 
 
 
 
1 
 
Chapter I – Preliminary 
Introduction 
The Reserve Bank (“Bank”) had introduced a regulatory framework for NBFC-Account 
Aggregator (NBFC-AA) on September 02, 2016. NBFC-AAs undertake the business 
of account aggregation, i.e., retrieve/ collect specified financial information from 
Financial Information Providers (FIPs) falling under the purview of various financial 
sector regulators (FSRs), viz., Reserve Bank of India, Securities and Exchange Board 
of India, Insurance Regulatory and Development Authority of India, Pension Fund 
Regulatory and Development Authority and Department of Revenue and aggregate, 
consolidate and present such information to the customers or Financial Information 
Users (FI-Us).  
2. While the AA ecosystem encompasses wide range of stakeholders, the entities 
which are directly involved in the transmission of financial information of customers, 
viz., NBFC-AAs, FIPs, and FI-Us, are regarded as participants of the AA ecosystem. 
The transfer of information involves multiple entities regulated by various FSRs which 
makes the AA ecosystem complex and unique. The Reserve Bank has issued a 
regulatory framework for operations of the NBFC-AAs and Regulated Entities (REs) 
of the Bank to participate in the ecosystem. Similarly respective regulators have issued 
specific guidelines for their REs. However, owing to involvement of multiple entities 
(NBFC-AA, FIP and FI-U) in the transmission of financial information and increase in 
number of participants resulting in surge in transactions in the ecosystem, several 
operational issues are expected to continuously emerge among the participants. As 
the endeavour is to encourage faster adoption of the AA ecosystem on a voluntary 
basis, it would be desirable to complement the regulatory framework with a market-
based mechanism to address these issues.  
3. Owing to idiosyncrasies of the AA ecosystem and the need to strike a balance 
between regulation and innovation, it is felt that a Self-Regulatory Organisation (SRO) 
for the AA ecosystem could play an important role. In view of the above, it has been 
decided to recognise SRO(s) for the AA ecosystem (SRO-AA), broadly in line with the 
comprehensive ‘Omnibus Framework for recognising Self-Regulatory Organisations 
(SROs) for Regulated Entities (REs) of the Reserve Bank of India’ issued on March 
21, 2024. 
2 
 
Chapter II – SRO-AA - Characteristics and Objectives 
 
4. The SRO-AA is expected to operate with credibility, objectivity and responsibility 
under the overall oversight of the Reserve Bank, to promote healthy and sustainable 
development of the AA ecosystem. The SRO-AA should have the following 
characteristics to meet the requirements of the AA Ecosystem for its efficient 
functioning:  
i. True Representation of the AA ecosystem: The SRO-AA should endeavour to 
become a true representative of the AA ecosystem, encompassing regulated entities 
of Financial Sector Regulators acting as NBFC-AAs, FIPs and FI-Us. This 
representative structure should foster inclusivity and enable the SRO-AA to draw upon 
the collective expertise and experience of its members, resulting in development of 
rules that are pragmatic, adaptive and widely accepted within the ecosystem. The term 
'members' used in this framework refers to the participants of the AA ecosystem which 
accept membership of the SRO-AA. The respective membership agreements between 
SRO-AA and its members will help SRO-AA to define the terms and conditions for 
efficient functioning of the ecosystem. 
ii. Code of Conduct and Oversight: The SRO-AA should set ethical, professional 
and governance codes, in relation to the participation in the AA ecosystem and monitor 
the compliance of these codes by the members. It should have strong governance 
mechanisms, including focus on independent board, transparency and adherence to 
well-defined processes for overseeing activities of their members.  
iii. Development-oriented Activity: The SRO-AA should adopt a development-
focussed approach, actively contributing to the growth and evolution of the ecosystem. 
The SRO-AA should offer support, expert guidance and capacity building initiatives to 
enable its members to seamlessly adopt and implement the technical requirements of 
the AA ecosystem. The SRO-AA should educate public about the aspects related to 
account aggregation, open finance, etc. The SRO-AA should foster a more resilient, 
robust and efficiently functioning AA ecosystem.  
iv. Independence from Influence: It is expected that the SRO-AA functions above 
self-interest of any sort and addresses larger concerns of the ecosystem and financial 
3 
 
system as a whole. To maintain credibility, the SRO-AA should operate independently, 
free from the influence of any single member or group of members. This would ensure 
refined decision-making and prevent the organisation from being swayed by the 
interests of a dominant few. The SRO-AA should maintain impartiality, avoid conflicts 
of interest and ensure unbiased oversight over its members. The independence of the 
SRO-AA would enhance its reputation as a neutral and reliable entity, essential for 
gaining the trust and confidence of both participants and Financial Sector Regulators. 
While acting as the industry representative, the SRO-AA is expected to ensure 
equitable and transparent treatment for all its members. 
v. Grievance Redressal and Dispute Resolution: The SRO-AA should devise and 
implement standardised procedures for grievance redressal and handling disputes 
among members, including processes to resolve these disputes through a transparent 
and consistent dispute resolution/ arbitration mechanism. 
Objectives 
5. The SRO-AA is expected to achieve the following objectives: 
i. 
The SRO-AA, through comprehensive membership agreements, should adopt 
objective, well-defined and consultative processes to make rules relating to 
conduct of its members and be able to monitor the compliance of these rules. 
ii. 
The SRO-AA should promote a culture of compliance of regulatory compliance 
and public good by the participants of the AA ecosystem. 
iii. 
The SRO-AA should act as the collective voice of its members in providing 
suggestions to/ engagements with the Reserve Bank, other Financial Sector 
Regulators and other stakeholders. The SRO-AA should aim to represent and 
address broader ecosystem concerns and play a pivotal role in the functioning 
of the AA ecosystem. 
iv. 
The SRO-AA should collect and share relevant information with the Reserve 
Bank to aid in policymaking.  
v. 
The SRO-AA should undertake/ encourage a culture of research and 
development within the AA ecosystem to encourage innovation while ensuring 
highest standards of compliance and self-governance. 
 
4 
 
Chapter III – SRO-AA - Eligibility Criteria and Membership 
 
Eligibility Criteria for the Applicant 
6.  In order to ensure that the SRO-AA delivers on its objectives and responsibilities, 
it is important that its independence and integrity is enshrined in its establishment and 
composition. The entities intending to function as an SRO shall, therefore, fulfil the 
following eligibility criteria: 
i. 
The applicant should be set up as a not-for-profit company registered under 
Section 8 of the Companies Act, 2013.   
ii. 
The applicant should have/ demonstrate to achieve a minimum net worth of 
Rupees two crore within a period of one year after recognition as an SRO-AA 
by Reserve Bank, or before commencement of operations as an SRO-AA, 
whichever is earlier. Thereafter, the SRO-AA shall maintain the minimum 
required net worth on an ongoing basis. 
iii. 
The shareholding of the SRO-AA should be sufficiently diversified and no entity 
shall hold 10% or more of its paid-up share capital, either singly or acting in 
concert. 
iv. 
The applicant must possess/ demonstrate the ability to create necessary 
infrastructure to enable it to discharge responsibilities of the SRO-AA effectively 
and consistently. It must have capability and resources for a robust IT 
infrastructure and the ability to deploy technological solutions within a 
reasonable timeframe. 
v. 
The applicant and key executives must have professional competence and 
have general reputation of fairness and integrity to the satisfaction of the 
Reserve Bank. The applicant should not be involved in any legal proceeding, 
which may have an adverse impact on the interest of the sector. Further, the 
applicant should not have been convicted of any offence including moral 
turpitude/ economic offence in the past.   
Membership Criteria 
7.  It is necessary that the SRO-AA operates as a true representative of the ecosystem 
and its members. In particular, the SRO-AA shall also adhere to the following criteria: 
5 
 
i. 
The participants of the AA ecosystem, viz., NBFC-AAs, FIPs and FI-Us, are 
eligible to become members of the SRO-AA. The REs of all Financial Sector 
Regulators participating in the AA ecosystem may join SRO-AA as members.  
ii. 
While the membership for SRO-AA is voluntary, all NBFC-AAs are encouraged 
to join the SRO-AA for the purpose of efficient development of the ecosystem. 
Additionally, SRO-AA should ensure that its members should evenly include all 
the types/ classes of FIPs and FI-Us. To ensure balanced representation, the 
SRO-AA shall have at least 25 unique entities each from FIPs and FI-Us as its 
members at all times, subject to review. Failure to maintain the same, would 
render the SRO-AA liable for revocation of the recognition granted. 
iii. 
The membership fee structure developed by the SRO-AA should be reasonable 
and non-discriminatory. While membership fees may vary or be differentiated, 
based on size, intent, capability, etc., it should be ensured that the membership 
character remains non-discriminatory. 
iv. 
The SRO-AA should derive necessary powers through the membership 
agreements to set rules, codes of conduct, etc. for its members and monitor 
compliance thereto. 
 
 
6 
 
Chapter IV – SRO - AA – Governance and Management 
 
8.  The SRO-AA is expected to operate with transparency, professionalism and 
independence, in order to foster greater confidence in the integrity of the ecosystem.  
Compliance with the highest standards of governance as prescribed in the Companies 
Act, 2013 is a pre-requisite for an effective SRO-AA. Additionally, the SRO-AA shall 
abide by the following guidelines: 
(a) General 
i. 
The SRO-AA shall be professionally managed and have a suitable provision in 
its Articles of Association (AoA)/ bye-laws to ensure this. AoA/ bye-laws shall 
clearly provide for the manner in which the Board of Directors (BoD) would 
function, duly addressing issues of conflict of interest.  
ii. 
The AoA/ bye-laws of the SRO-AA shall specify the functions it will discharge, 
as one of its main objects. The AoA/ bye-laws shall also clearly lay down the 
criteria for admission, expulsion, suspension, re-admission, etc. of members. 
iii. 
The Board shall, among others, frame a policy on rotation of Directors for 
important positions in the Board. Any change in the directorship or any adverse 
information about any Director, shall be immediately reported to the Reserve 
Bank. 
iv. 
The Board shall ensure that the SRO-AA has adequately skilled human 
resources and robust technical capability to effectively discharge its 
responsibilities. The Board shall follow transparent practices for establishing its 
governance processes. 
v. 
The SRO-AA shall ensure compliance by its members with the provisions of 
relevant Acts, applicable regulations, guidelines, directions or circulars issued 
by the Reserve Bank/ other Financial Sector Regulators from time to time. 
 
(b) Directors 
To uphold good governance and ensure fair representation, composition of the Board 
of Directors should adhere to the following: 
7 
 
i. 
The Directors shall fulfil the 'fit and proper' criteria as framed by the Board of the 
SRO-AA on an ongoing basis. The views of the Reserve Bank on ‘fit and proper’ 
status of the Board of Directors would be final.  
ii. 
The Directors must have professional competence and have general reputation 
of fairness and integrity to the satisfaction of the Reserve Bank.  
iii. 
The Directors should not be involved in any legal proceeding, which may have 
an adverse impact on the interest of the ecosystem. Further, the Directors 
should not have been convicted of any offence including moral turpitude/ 
economic offence in the past.   
 
iv. 
At least one-third of members in the Board, including the Chairperson, should 
be independent and without any active association with the participants of the 
AA ecosystem. 
v. 
Not more than one-fourth of the members in the Board shall be nominated by 
NBFC-AAs.  
vi. 
To ensure that all sectors/ types of participants of the AA ecosystem are duly 
represented, the Board should have a good mix of Directors with varied 
expertise and experience from FIPs and FI-Us. At least one director should 
possess expertise in regulations of banks and financial services. 
 
(c) Committees 
i. 
The SRO-AA may constitute Committees and Working Groups focused on 
specific areas with representatives/ experts from members.  
ii. 
Each of the various Board level Committees of the SRO-AA should have 
independent Chairperson to the extent feasible and practicable. 
 
 
8 
 
Chapter V – SRO-AA - Functions and Responsibilities 
 
Functions  
9.  Primary responsibility of the SRO-AA towards its members would be to promote 
best business practices and controls. The SRO-AA shall establish minimum 
benchmarks and conventions for professional market conduct amongst its members. 
In the interest of its members, the SRO-AA should aim to protect interests of the 
customers, participants and other stakeholders in the ecosystem. In particular, the 
SRO-AA should undertake the following functions:    
a) Codes and Benchmarks 
i. 
The SRO-AA should frame a code of conduct to be followed by its members 
along with their outsourced entities like technology service providers and 
monitor adherence to the code as well as compliance with the regulatory and 
statutory instructions by its members. 
ii. 
The SRO-AA should frame standardized model formats taking into account 
specific requirements, for instance, formats for agreement between the FIPs/ 
FI-Us and NBFC-AAs as well as the outsourced entities like technology service 
providers. The formats should meet various regulatory and statutory 
requirements and act as baseline standards. 
iii. 
The SRO-AA should promote fair competition in the ecosystem by establishing 
ecosystem-wide norms and avoid unfair trade practices by the participants 
through collaborative efforts. 
iv. 
The SRO-AA should work in collaboration with the Reserve Bank to ensure the 
responsible usage of financial information by participants of the ecosystem. 
v. 
The SRO-AA should continually evaluate the requirements of the ecosystem 
and develop a mechanism to periodically amend the codes to suit the needs of 
the participants and customers without impacting the functioning of the 
ecosystem. 
vi. 
The codes / best practices developed by the SRO-AA should be in compliance 
with and, within, the applicable statutory / regulatory instructions. These shall 
not be a substitute to the prescribed regulatory framework for the AA 
ecosystem. 
9 
 
vii. 
The SRO-AA may establish benchmarks for its members regarding various 
functions by dynamically aligning them with the performance of the ecosystem 
and actively encourage its members to strive for their achievement.    
b) Oversight and Market Discipline 
i. 
The SRO-AA should have a structured framework to guide its oversight and 
market discipline functions. The baseline surveillance standards and oversight 
framework should meet the regulatory expectations on aspects like fraud 
prevention, trade practices, dispute resolution, conduct, fair usage, etc., and 
ensure uniformity, transparency and accountability in the ecosystem. 
ii. 
The SRO-AA should ensure strict confidentiality of personal data and restrict 
data collection to essential information required for the development of the 
ecosystem and in compliance with regulatory and statutory provisions. The 
SRO-AA shall adhere to relevant data protection laws.  
iii. 
The SRO-AA should establish clear standards of conduct and specify 
consequences for violation of agreed rules / codes such as counselling, 
cautioning, reprimanding, suspending and expelling members. It may be noted 
that such consequences shall not entail monetary penalties in any manner. 
c) Developmental 
i. 
The SRO-AA should promote knowledge of statutory/ regulatory provisions and 
provide necessary resources for exchange of expertise and experience among 
members. It may also arrange training and awareness programmes for skill 
development on contemporary issues for its members.  
ii. 
The SRO-AA should educate the public about aspects related to account 
aggregation, open finance, grievance redressal mechanisms and dispute 
resolution mechanisms available to them and also spread awareness in general 
about the ecosystem. 
iii. 
The SRO-AA should disseminate sector-specific information through 
periodicals, bulletins, pamphlets, magazines, etc., from publicly available data, 
for creating awareness on matters of interest to members. The SRO-AA should 
submit statistics related to the ecosystem to the Reserve Bank. Such 
dissemination should also be done through digital mode.  
10 
 
d) Common Services and Infrastructure 
i. 
The SRO-AA should provide various permissible common services and 
infrastructure, depending on the necessity and with prior approval of the 
Reserve Bank, to the participants of the ecosystem. It should have a scalable 
technology solution for this purpose. 
ii. 
The SRO-AA should develop best practices and provide implementation 
assistance to enable participants’ adoption of technical specifications and 
utilization/usage of common services and infrastructure.  
iii. 
The SRO-AA should maintain records of participants and technology service 
providers involved in the ecosystem. 
iv. 
The SRO-AA should deploy simple, intuitive dashboards/ metrics/ performance 
indicators for the Financial Sector Regulators including participants and other 
stakeholders. 
e) Grievance Redressal/ Dispute Resolution 
i. 
The SRO-AA should establish a grievance redressal mechanism as well as a 
dispute resolution/ arbitration framework for the participants of the AA 
ecosystem. The SRO-AA should offer counselling on restrictive, unhealthy and 
such other practices which may be detrimental to growth of the ecosystem.  
ii. 
The dispute resolution framework should consistently use efficient, fair and 
transparent policies and procedures that are in line with the regulatory and 
statutory requirements and should ensure timely and effective dispute 
resolution harnessing mediation/conciliation and arbitration.  
f) Responsibilities towards the Reserve Bank and other Financial Sector 
Regulators 
In general, the SRO-AA is expected to complement and supplement the role of the 
Reserve Bank and other Financial Sector Regulators in ensuring better compliance 
with the regulatory guidelines, development of the sector, protection of stakeholder 
interests, foster innovation and detection of early warning signals. The SRO-AA is also 
expected to act as a bridge between the participants and the Reserve Bank and other 
Financial Sector Regulators.  
11 
 
In particular, the SRO-AA shall discharge the following responsibilities towards the 
Financial Sector Regulators: 
i. 
The SRO-AA should keep the Reserve Bank regularly informed of the 
developments/ trends/ concerns in the ecosystem to complement the oversight. 
It shall also promptly inform the Reserve Bank and other Financial Sector 
Regulators about any violation by its member of the provision of the Acts or the 
rules/ guidelines/ regulations/ directions issued by the Reserve Bank/ other 
Financial Sector Regulators, that comes to its notice. 
ii. 
The SRO-AA should carry out any work assigned to it by the Reserve Bank and 
examine the proposals or suggestions referred to it. 
iii. 
The SRO-AA shall provide data/ information, sought by the Reserve Bank/ other 
Financial Sector Regulators periodically or as advised. 
iv. 
The SRO-AA should submit an Annual Report to the Reserve Bank and other 
Financial Sector Regulators, within three months of completion of the 
accounting year. The SRO-AA shall submit the periodic/ adhoc returns as may 
be sought by the Reserve Bank/ other Financial Sector Regulators. 
v. 
The SRO-AA should engage in periodic interactions with the Reserve Bank. It 
is expected that SRO-AA would look at the larger picture of the ecosystem in 
offering its views/ inputs/ suggestions. 
vi. 
The SRO-AA should discharge such other functions and also abide by such 
other directions as specified by the Reserve Bank from time to time. 
vii. 
The Reserve Bank may, if it deems necessary, inspect the books of the SRO-
AA or arrange to have the books inspected by an audit firm. The SRO-AA shall 
be obligated to provide the required information to the inspection team for the 
purpose of conduct of inspection. The expenses of such inspection shall be 
borne by the SRO-AA. 
 
 
12 
 
Chapter VI – SRO – AA – Application Process 
 
Application for Recognition 
10.  The process of recognition of the SRO shall be robust so as to ensure adherence 
to a set of stringent parameters essential for the critical role it is required to play. An 
entity aspiring to function as an SRO under this framework shall be required to fulfil 
the following requirements/ submit the following documents while making an 
application for recognition. The requirements are as under: 
i. 
The application made by the applicant shall be accompanied by:  
a. A copy of the Memorandum of Association relating to the constitution of 
the SRO-AA; 
b. A copy of the Articles of Association/ bye-laws of SRO-AA; 
c. For companies already in existence, the Audited balance sheet for the 
entire period the company is in existence, or for last three years, 
whichever is less; 
d. Details of the constitution of its Board and the Directors, the roles/ 
responsibilities of management and the manner in which its operations 
would be undertaken; 
e. The powers and duties of the office bearers1 of SRO-AA; 
f. 
The application shall be signed by the authorized person, on behalf of the 
applicant under authority of its Board of Directors; 
g. The Reserve Bank may require the entity to submit any further such 
information or clarification as may be deemed necessary. 
ii. 
Any application, which is not complete in all aspects or does not fulfil the 
requisite criteria shall be liable to be rejected by the Reserve Bank. However, 
before rejecting any such application, the Reserve Bank shall give an 
opportunity to the applicant to address such objections, within 15 days from 
date of dispatch of intimation by the Reserve Bank. 
iii. 
Where the applicant is deemed suitable, the Reserve Bank would proceed to 
issue a “Letter of Recognition” as the SRO-AA. The Reserve Bank reserves the 
                                                            
1 including WTD and CEO, by whatever name called, and includes any person authorised as such by the applicant. 
13 
 
right to not grant recognition to any applicant. The decision of the Reserve Bank 
in this regard shall be final. 
Conditions for grant of recognition 
11.  The recognition granted to SRO-AA shall be valid subject to the following 
conditions: 
i. 
Information or particulars furnished by the SRO-AA must be true and not 
misleading in any material aspects.  
ii. 
The requirements prescribed in this framework, including that of membership 
as prescribed, shall be adhered to on a continuing basis.  
iii. 
The applicant must be fit and proper for the grant of recognition as an SRO-AA, 
in all other respects.  
iv. 
The applicant should undertake to function as per the objectives and 
responsibilities prescribed under this framework. The applicant should not 
undertake any other activity which could create conflict of interest with the main 
objectives of the SRO-AA. 
v. 
The SRO-AA shall ensure adherence to the terms and conditions governing its 
recognition. The recognition granted to the SRO-AA shall be subject to periodic 
review by the Reserve Bank, as considered necessary.  
vi. 
While granting recognition as an SRO-AA, the Reserve Bank may, if deemed 
necessary, prescribe such other conditions as may be necessary to ensure that 
functioning of the SRO-AA is not prejudicial to the public interest. 
vii. 
The Reserve Bank shall revoke the recognition granted to the SRO-AA, if it 
deems the functioning of the SRO-AA to be detrimental to public interest or any 
other stakeholder and/ or the SRO-AA is found to be conducting activities which 
are not in conformity with the objectives of the SRO-AA, after giving due 
opportunity of being heard. 
 
 
